---
layout: post
title:  "We need a renewed focus on our own cancer antibody responses"
date:   2021-02-14 08:00:00
categories:
- science
tags:
- cancer
- immunity
- antibodies
---
Antibodies are central to the treatment of cancer—we use them to block certain cell surface receptor signaling, to label cancer cells for destruction by the immune system, and to block signals that are preventing immune responses. We use antibodies in these same roles in infectious disease, and so it would be reasonable to expect that lessons from infectious disease can often be applied to cancer treatment.

We now have technologies to study the antibody responses to infectious diseases in detail, and in the last couple decades we have learned antibodies are an active hub of communication across the immune system. However, we seldom ask about how our endogenously produced antibodies might influence cancer progression. Why is this? The standard story of our progression in understanding cancer immunity is that we expected the immune system could not mount a productive defense for a long time. Checkpoint inhibitors highlighted and that an active response is present but halted at its last steps. Given the recent revisions to our mental model of cellular immunity, I have been working through the literature of exactly what we know about our humoral responses. I think the results indicate it is time for a renewed focus on the humoral immune response to cancers.

### Does the immune system naturally develop its own antibodies against cancer?

Most definitely yes! This has most extensively been explored for prototypical surface antigens like mutant EGFR, HER2, and [NY-ESO-1](https://rupress.org/jem/article/187/8/1349/7598/A-Survey-of-the-Humoral-Immune-Response-of-Cancer). The XXX consortium in the 1990’s performed a variety of clinical investigations of the titers against these antigens. In general, the majority of patients had measurable antibody responses to tumor-exclusive markers, and the titers correlated with higher expression of those antigens. HER2 and NY-ESO-1 show that the targets did not have to be mutated but could simply be aberrantly expressed. cDNA expression libraries expanded our ability to identify target antigens in the 1990's, and tumor-binding antibodies could be identified against surface markers [unique to individual patients’ tumors](https://rupress.org/jem/article/187/8/1163/7587/New-Paths-in-Human-Cancer-Serology). In fact, many groups have proposed [to identify cancers](https://www.nature.com/articles/srep05088) through their high abundance of auto-antibody staining. A humoral immune response is a common feature of cancers.

### Do these antibodies have the capacity to eliminate tumors?

Again, absolutely. We know this from years of using anti-tumor antibodies with immune effector response as a key feature. Mouse studies have shown that responses on checkpoint inhibition increase the titer of anti-tumor antibodies, and that this convalescent plasma can be protective on passive immunization. A recent study even took naturally arising antibodies from a patient and recognized that they could be made to be effective if one changed the Fc region to improve immune effector response.

### What are the Fc properties of endogenous antibodies?

The last example above brings to outline the limits of our knowledge; if we have these antibody responses, why are they ineffective at eliminating tumors? Since some of the studies on the prevalence of anti-tumor antibodies in the 1990’s, we have learned that antibodies are quite complicated. An antibody with the same antigen targeting can be [pro- or anti-inflammatory](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2020.04.013), promote different types of immune responses, and is regulated through sequence and post-translational changes. The Fc signal conveyed to the immune system can be [modulated in an antigen-specific manner](https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/article?id=10.1371/journal.ppat.1005456) by signals we do not fully understand. While great progress has been made in our ability to characterize the Fc properties of antibodies, I could not find any systematic characterization of them in cancer. Even remarkably basic questions, like the isotype distribution of anti-tumor antibodies, have not been addressed.

### Why care about endogenously produced antibodies when we can provide passive immunity through monoclonal antibodies?

Given our success in developing monoclonal antibody therapies against cancer, why should we care about the antibodies our body makes? We can see answers to this question in our approach to infectious diseases. First, there may not be defined antigens against every patient’s tumor. Even if we were to develop a wide panel of monoclonal antibodies, tumors are relentlessly adaptable. Endogenous responses can mature and spread across antigens and so possibly overcome the development of resistance. Finally, our endogenous antibodies likely modulate our response to monoclonal therapies. Our lab has been [developing tools](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.05.018) to ask how antibodies communicate with the immune system when present in combination, and one feature we see is widespread antagonism through competition for both antigen and Fc receptors.

Having read through the literature more extensively, I am struck by how much it seems we have ignored this arm of the cancer immune response. There are very basic questions that it seems we now have the tools to answer and can change our approach to treatment:

-	When does the ineffectiveness of antibodies arise through antibody properties, cancer properties, or both?
-	What are the Fc properties of antibodies, and how do they compare to other chronic infections?
-	How do endogenous antibodies influence the response to therapeutic monoclonals?
-	Can we selectively change the properties of anti-tumor antibodies in vivo? Are there active immune signals ensuring that these antibodies are not tumor destructive? 

Certainly, there have been frustrating setbacks on the path to cancer immunotherapy. One of those has been cancer vaccines that hoped to unleash an immune response against the disease. However, our understanding now is that an immune response—both cellular and humoral—exists but is generally halted at its last steps. We have learned so much about how to unleash cellular immunity in the last few years, and it is time to release the other arm of immunity.
